---
layout: post
title: How I hire - Interviews
image: ../../../assets/post/2020-10-07-how-i-hire/walkway.jpg
---

Part 2 of a 2-part post on what I've learned as a hiring manager. It's worth spending time on your process.

# Part 2: Interviews

Near as I can tell, interviews are mandatory. Even the most highly recommended candidate or previous employee must be interviewed in the same manner as every other candidate. In truth, I used to dread interviewing - both as a manager and a candidate. I struggled to answer trivia questions, I failed to make a connection, I forgot that the real interview is really the first 90 to 180 days. As good as we like to think we are at hiring, there's just no way you can get a good feel for how someone operates day-to-day in just a few hours. So then, why bother interviewing at all? What can you accomplish and how can you, the manager, accurately evaluate someone for an open position in that time?

*Spoiler alert: you can't.*

Still, that's okay. Interviews aren't about you. They're about your team and your candidate. No two candidates are alike, and not everyone interviews well. Imagine you had a solid recommendation from someone you trust, but they struggle with your interview process. Would you question the recommendation, the process, or the candidate? Perhaps it's any of the three, but the only part you can control is the process. I think the best you can do is represent your team and your company in the most honest & straightforward way possible. Just like [writing a job listing,]({{site.url}}/2020-10-02/how-i-hire.html#write-a-job-listing) the best candidates will respond to a thoughtful interview process.

Even with a well-planned process & good execution, hiring doesn't always go right. You might make the wrong hire, or let the perfect employee slip past. Mistakes are inevitable learning opportunities you can use to improve your process and as a reminder that evaluation doesn't stop once the offer letter is signed.

Now, how's your calendar looking? Do you have some time to chat? Good, let's get started!

## Communicating with your candidates

In my current position at a mid-market corporation, much of my initial communication is handled through an _Enterprise Recruitment Platform._ Candidates apply or are funneled in via external sources like Linkedin, indeed, or other job aggregators. Their contact information and application materials are made available to me, which allows me to review & screen candidates in the platform and have our internal recruiter reach out to schedule an initial interview. At smaller companies, I was usually the only point of contact with candidates. Their applications would reach my inbox directly, and I would handle the scheduling.

Candidates I don't feel are a good fit will usually not receive a reply, which is fine so long as that's made clear in the application process. The most basic rule I have is that any candidate you reach out to or talk with but who isn't selected to move on *must receive a timely response.* Even if you miss out on a good candidate, it's the responsible thing to do. It's not fair to keep people on the hook. If you really wanted them to move on, you would have selected them...and really, what's wrong with reaching out after the fact if you change your mind? Just be open and honest in your discussion.

Unless your organization requires all communication to happen through the recruiter or hiring platform, I suggest reaching out directly via email, call, or even chat. Anything official should happen through official channels - job offers must always be in writing using your organization's required format, for instance. Things like scheduling, follow-ups, and questions are usually fine to handle through other methods, and provide a more comfortable and personal experience. Don't be afraid to answer questions openly and honestly outside of interviews. It can be hard to come up with questions on the spot, so take the time to respond completely, or offer time to chat outside of regular interviews. Goodness knows, I don't always have a good answer right away. I've found that if you come up with a better answer later and can't shake that feeling, it's best to just reach out and correct yourself. Your candidates will appreciate the transparency!

In all cases, I strongly recommend being open and honest with your candidate. For example, my organization recently decided to outsource our entire engineering division. This was a huge portion of the people we (in reliability engineering & operations) worked with on a daily basis, which significantly changed our mission & outlook. This also happened right as we were starting to interview for an open position. Events like this are important to share with your candidate! Unless it's trade secrets or something you can't disclose for legal reasons, be as open, honest, and transparent as possible throughout the entire process. Like I've said, you aren't just filling a position - you're building your team.

Lastly, be professional and consistent in your communications. Let people know _what_ they can expect, _when_ they can expect to hear from you, and provide some kind of deadline for when they should reach out to you if they don't hear back. Being busy isn't an excuse to waste someone's time!

### Documentation, and sharing it

I dedicated a section to this in Part 1, but I'll bring it up again because it's very important! As a quick recap, you should document your hiring process in a format suitable for general consumption by:

- Your team (so everyone understands & can contribute to the process)
- Your company (for auditing, compliance, and cross-team collaboration)
- Your candidate (as to set expectations from the outset)

Feel free to use [my hiring documentation]({{site.url}}/assets/post/2020-10-07-how-i-hire/hiring.html) as a starting point!

## Pre-screening

I generally encourage people to apply for a job even if they think they aren't qualified. We craft job listings to the best of our ability, but [impostor syndrome](https://about.gitlab.com/blog/2020/09/02/imposter-syndrome-and-remote-work/) is _real_ and not everyone who is qualified will apply. On the flip side, you might need a good method of handling underqualified candidates or those who aren't exactly interested in what you're looking for. This is where pre-screening comes in. It can take a few forms. You might use one or more of these, but they should happen early on in the hiring process. For example, my company requires a recruiter call first, then after my 1:1 with the candidate, I send along a short questionnaire before scheduling the technical/team interview.

- A short discussion with the candidate. This often takes the form of a recruiter call or a 1:1 between the hiring manager and the candidate. If your team communicates primarily via text/chat, or for accessibility reasons, consider using a text-based platform for better representation on both sides 
- Questionnaires. These may or may not be technical, but like your hiring process overall, you should have a goal in mind. With this, I'm looking for effective written communication skills and how they approach novel problems. There are some opinionated questions as well. Can my candidate disagree respectfully? These (like the entire interview process) are an awful place for trivia questions, but can be kinda fun with questions like "What's the best Linux distribution?" Obviously there's no right answer _(cough Debian cough)_ but it lets a candidate express their opinion or make a case for something.
- Take-home exercises. These are usually things like programming activities or contrived scenarios where the candidate can showcase their skills as they relate to the actual day-to-day work. I once interviewed at Slack for a developer support manager position, where they wanted to know if I could do the job. They provided 5 real-world prompts from customer support issues and enough context to get started, and expected responses as though I'd be replying to a customer. I really liked that exercise, as it put me in the seat of a developer support engineer.
- Reference checks. These usually happen at the end of interviews, but in some situations you might ask for references upfront. There's no hard and fast rule saying you can't reach out to a candidate's references prior to interviewing them, but do be considerate.

## Employer-required interviews

As mentioned, my employer requires a pre-screening call between the recruiter & the candidate. They're usually looking for the basics, like if they've read the description, meet the minimum requirements, explain the benefits, and confirm salary requirements. This takes a small burden off my shoulders, though I usually end up asking some of the same questions. Salary is one of the more important aspects of job negotiation, so I like to ensure the candidate received the right information and can accept the salary range offered.

I've had some cases where I wanted to talk with a pre-screened candidate who was rejected (or self-rejected) after the initial recruiter screen. The recruiter had no problem with this. It's important to understand why the candidate didn't move on, so talk with your recruiter if they didn't advance the candidate before reaching out to the candidate directly.

Other than the recruiter call, I'm not subject to any other employer-required interviews. My engineering organization did have a panel interview made up of other employees from around the company. It was not formally required outside of the engineering org, but it was such a great process that most hiring managers wanted to participate. Of course, your organization might be different. Since you've already planned your interview process, you should have a good understanding of any employer-required interviews.

## Advancing, or not

By nature, interviewing is a highly selective process. Even if you're lucky(?) enough to be hiring more than one candidate, you'll have to decide who advances and who doesn't. This is one of those management things which doesn't get easier over time, though your intuition will improve with each interview. Every situation will be different, and this is absolutely a skill you'll have to develop. I'll offer what advice I can.

- Don't be a fence-sitter. If you're heming and hawing between advance or don't, you probably shouldn't advance the candidate. _You will make mistakes._ You'll miss out on good candidates, but don't worry - if they're good, they'll find a position. Being decisive is what's best for everyone. It allows you and your candidate to move on with obvious focus.
- Don't dwell. This goes hand-in-hand with fence-sitting. It's rather unfair to leave a _pretty good_ candidate on the hook because you want to see who else comes along. Advance them, or don't.
- Consult with your interview team. If I've advanced a candidate through the initial screening, ask your team to evaluate the information you've gathered so far. If they reject a candidate you liked, consider whether it makes sense to advance. You'll have to use good judgement here; rejections from your team prior to meeting the candidate shouldn't happen for frivolous reasons, and you're well within your right as hiring manager to advance a candidate regardless.
- Communicate often! Provide regular updates (once or twice a week) to your candidate.
- [Hire or no hire.](https://www.joelonsoftware.com/2006/10/25/the-guerrilla-guide-to-interviewing-version-30/) Joel says it well. _"Never say “Maybe, I can’t tell.” If you can’t tell, that means No Hire. It’s really easier than you’d think. Can’t tell? Just say no! If you are on the fence, that means No Hire."_ Reading his guide to interviewing helped me a ton back when I was just starting out. You can probably see his influence in my process even now! It's aimed at software engineering managers and it's very good. Open it in a new tab and go read it. Or read it now, and come back here later. I'll wait...

Maybe you see a pattern in my advice...that's because interviewing is time-consuming, costly, and can drain focus on other initiatives. It's in your candidate's and your team's best interest to act decisively.

# The 3 interviews I use, and why

I explained these a little bit in [Part 1,]({{site.url}}/2020-10-02/how-i-hire.html) but only a smidge. Using 3 interviews and a team of about 5 people (including myself) feels Goldilocks to me. Who makes up your interview team is more important than how many interviews, though I think it's important to space interviews out a little bit. Some considerations on who to include in your interview team:

- Direct co-workers. The people who will be responsible for training your new hire, answering their questions, and working with them day-to-day.
- Indirect co-workers. People your new hire might work with on a semi-regular basis when cross-team collaboration is necessary.
- Completely unrelated co-workers. People your new hire might see at the water cooler. These folks can be great for values & non-technical interviews.
- Other hiring managers. I love when other managers interview my candidates, and I love when I get the chance to do the same. Managers have a different perspective on candidates & team dynamics, as we're usually "outsiders" on the team.

Don't forget to take notes! It doesn't matter if you write 'em down or type 'em up, but keep them someplace safe. In some cases, your employer might require you to submit any notes you take to the People department, but more often they'll just ask you to hang on to your notes.

## Getting to know you 1 on 1

This is just me and the candidate. I like to reach out and schedule these directly. I'll set expectations and let the candidate know, this is a short (15-30 minute) video call just to get to know them. When scheduling, I might share some of the questions they can expect to answer, which are usually things like:

- Why are you interested in this org/position?
- What did you like in the job listing?
- What do you want to do in your next position?
- Is there anything you dis/liked in your previous position?

I generally avoid asking about job history, as their resume usually speaks to that, though if there's a particular project or position you'd like to know more about, this is a great time to do it. Make sure to leave time for your candidate to ask questions as well. It's fine if they don't have questions too! I like these calls a lot, it's a great way to make a friendly introduction and helps establish you as the central point of contact for the process.

### After the 1:1

By the time I'm finishing up the call, I have a pretty good idea if I'm going to advance someone or not. Unless they totally bomb out of the call, I'll send them the full [hiring process documentation]({{site.url}}/assets/post/2020-10-07-how-i-hire/hiring.html) and my pre-technical questionnaire at this time. After the candidate completes the questionnaire, I'll submit all this information to my team, along with my notes.

I've had interviews where I really enjoyed talking with a candidate, but their written responses showed they weren't qualified for the position. That's fine! Let them know and move on.

## Team interview



## Gut-check

## Making the decision

## Rejections & feedback

## Welcoming your new hire

## Summary
